---
author: Eric Hayden Campbell
date: June 22, 2019
title: Teaching Networking Experientally
subtitle: How to teach 40 high school students to program networks in 3 days
--- 

The first week of my PhD program, I learned about _active teaching
strategies_ for engaging students in the classroom, which force the
students to actively engage with the material, by responding to
questions, talking to each other, or moving around the classroom to
solve problems. The classic example is _Think, Pair, Share_ where
students _think_ about the solution to a problem on their own, _pair_
up with someone next to them to discuss the answer, and then _share_
their solution with the whole class (apparently this exact strategy
has been used, to great success, at real academic conferences like
OOPSLA). More creative and engaging tasks try to get students up
out of their seats, and think about the material by talking, doing, or
creating.

It's difficult to come up with active teaching strategies for computer
science. How do you get students up out of their seats to learn about
Algorithms? or Networking? How would you even think about that for
Formal Logic or Functional Programming?  The systems that we think
about are so complicated that even thinking about a hands-on activity
to teach these concepts beyond the basics seems impossible.

So, when [Nate](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~jnfoster/) asked
[Jonathan](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~dilorenzo/) and me to develop
and lead a 3-day workshop for high school students on Networking and
Security, I was a little lost. The students were to come to Cornell
from a STEM-focused public school in Philadelphia, PA; most of them
would have 0 programming experience and 0 knowledge of computer
science, networking, or computer security. How were we going to teach
them any of this in only three days? The familiar lecture+lab teaching
structure that we are used to at the university level wouldn't work --
Professors can hardly keep the attention of a room full of
20-year-olds for an _hour_, let alone 3 days. It was daunting.

Luckily, [Laure](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~laurejt/),
[Matthew](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~milano/),
[Eleanor](https://cs.pomona.edu/~ebirrell/), and
[Tom](https://tommagrino.com/), had come up with an activity to teach
networking to middle schoolers for the EYH conference. The activity
aimed to give _experiential_ knowledge to students having them figure
out, organically, how routers should behave. I had adopted this EYH
workshop as a first year, and thought it would be useful for the 4-H
conference. We adapted the activity to work with older students, and
used the concepts we could teach to develop programming labs where the
students would write code to implement exactly what they had
experientialy learned.

Over the course of three days and two labs we were able to teach
basics of programming, networking, and how the scientific method
applies to computer science -- _all without lecturing for more than 10
minutes at a time!_

### Part 1: Passing Notes in Class

What do routers do? -- They send packets back and forth. What are high
school students really good at? -- Passing notes back and forth. All
we did is construct a scenario that made the students act like routers
in a network, only instead of sending packets on the wire, they handed
handwritten notes to each other.

The students were each handed a piece of paper with an animal on it
and were told that there was exactly one other student who had the
same animal. Their task was to find the other pair with the same
animal -- without getting up from their desks or communicating
verbally -- and then learn an icebreaker-style fact about them
(e.g. favorite movie, musician, etc.). They were given notecards,
pens, and each table had a "grid number" (e.g. `A7` or `B2`, like on a
chess board).

That was it! We gave the students no direction about _what_ to write
on the notecards, or what kinds of strategies they might use to find
the other student with the same animal as them!  Nonetheless, in a
room with ~40 students, every student found their partner in only 7
minutes!

The kicker is that they used _realistic networking strategies_ to
solve the problem.
#### Approaches

The most common approach that students took was to send a note that
said something like 

> `We (C3) have the Orangutan`

Then, on receiving such a note, the students would either randomly
pass the note to someone else, or if they knew where the other
_Orangutan_ was, they would pass it to them. If they themselves _had_
the other orangutan, they would return a note that said something like

> `(Send to C3) We (A2) also have the Orangutan!`

This is essentially a nondeterministic version of TCP over the
standard [learning switch
protocol](http://yuba.stanford.edu/cs244wiki/index.php/Learning_Switch),
where instead of flooding unknown traffic to _all_ neighbors, a switch
forwards to a nondeterministically chosen neighbor!

Another approach is to take a generic gossip protocol approach and
send around a master list with blanks for everyone's animal. 

```
     A1 : ___
     A2 : ___ 
     A3 : ___
     ..
```

The students then fill in the master list as it goes around, by the
time the master list is completely filled out, at least one of every
pair knows who their partner is, so they can establish communication
with a message like

> `(Send to A2) We (C3) are the Orangutan! `

#### Wrapping Up the Activity

To cement the fact that the students had _just done what actual
routers do_ we had a short discussion at the end that related the task
to real networking concepts: what's a router? how do they work?  what
happens when I ask Google for cat pictures?  This was actually quite
easy, because the answers to all of these questions were some form of
"what you just did."

I'd done this before with Laure for an EYH workshop, so I wasn't
surprised by the outcome, but the fact that the students were able to
come up with realistic strategies that are analogous to the ones used
in the real internet was really exciting for Jonathan -- who had
retained a degree of healthy skepticism about whether or not this
would actually work. Oh ye of little faith...

### Part 2: Eventful Programming a with Simple API

Once this activity came to a close, we moved into the computer lab to
get the students programming by having them implement a [simple
learning switch](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8DDjbL4SSlY). We
exposed an [simple, declarative API](../pdfs/careerexcheatsheet.pdf)
that exposed some high-level functionality to mimic real networking
APIs ([click here for the lab
document](https://ericthewry.github.io/pdfs/careerexlab1.pdf)). Essentially,
we divided each router's functionality into three callbacks:
`itsForMe(Packet p)` (which is called when the destination of the
packet (`p`) is the current router), `dontKnow(Packet p)` (which is
called when you dont know where to send the packet next), and
`doKnow(Packet p)` which is called when you do know where to send the
packet next). In a real router, `itsForMe` roughly corresponds to
forwarding to an adjacent host, `doKnow` roughly corresponds to a
table hit, and `dontKnow` roughly corresponds to a table miss.

Taking inspiration from Kim Bruce's textbook [Java: An Eventful
Approach](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1060091), we gave the
students a graphical playground that they could fully manipluate. We
had routers connected by blue lines, and you could send a packet
(depicted by an envelope icon) by clicking first on the sender and
then on the receiver. [Download the code
here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1PqCkpgFG7JBEAvMdK0Ak4iCzwITRpwtu/view). Much
of the OO design and programming work here was done by a precocious
undergrad,
[Brianna](https://www.linkedin.com/in/brianna-adams-26b524178).

Overall this lab was a success! About 80% of the students were able to
finish the learning switch by the end of the hour we had alloted for
the lab. It seemed that the ~20% who really struggled were having
difficulty manipulating the syntax, a problem I hadn't expected, but
should have -- we didn't lecture them at all about syntax! Luckily
these student were able to grok this "reality gap" by the end of the
next day.

### Part 3: Passing Notes, Mafia Style

The next day, we brought the students back in to pass more notes, but
with a Byzantine twist. Instead of simply having the students discover
their unknown animal-partner, we made a few students "Evil". Their job
was to act just like normal message-passers, but completely mislead
their classmates about who had which animal. So if student `B7` was
evil, and they knew that `B6` had the `Hippogriff`, they might send a
note to `A7` saying

> `(Send to A7) B6 has the Hippogriff`

This scheme caused all kinds of chaos and confusion, and the students
loved it. Especially since the Evil students didn't know who else was
Evil, or how many evil students there were in total. We also included
a mechanic for detecting, and repairing the students my majority vote:
if an Evil student was "voted off the island" they flipped to Good,
however if a Good student was "voted off the island", they flipped to
being Evil. Here's how it worked:

After about 5 minutes of note passing, we stopped all message passing,
and collected a note from each student that detailed who they thought
had the same animal as them, e.g.

> `A5 thinks C4 has the other Liger`

We then acted as Teacher-Oracle and gave them one of two responses:
"Everyone is correct, and we're done" or "Someone is wrong, we need to
keep going" (we didn't specify who was wrong, just that someone was
wrong). Unfortunately, we never gave the first response (which was
entirely our fault).

Once the students learned that they were collectively wrong, we moved
into a second phase, voting. We fielded comments and accusations from
the students for about 5 minutes, and recorded their accusations. At
the end of the 5 minutes, everyone voted for who they thought was
Evil. 

This turned out great! The students were high-engery and deeply
involved in figuring out creative schemes to suss out the Evil
students. Mostly, they relied on the handwriting to detect forged
messages e.g. if they saw messages like _A7 has Hippo_, **A7 has
Cat**, (A8 has Cat), and **A8 has Dog**, they would conclude that it
was more likely for A7 to have the hippo and A8 to have the Cat. But
even still they often didn't have enough information to make it
through.

#### Aside: Lessons Learned

We were disappointed by the fact that the students were unable to
figure out who the Evil Students were. In fact, every time, they
turned a Good student into an Evil one, never the other way around. We
screwed this up by making our initial configuration too difficult.

![Clip-art credit to https://free.clipartof.com/details/1508-Free-Clipart-Of-A-Lion](/images/starting_config.png)

The students were arranged in 6 rows and 4 columns grid (as shown
above). They could pass messages forwards, backwards, or sideways, but
not diagonally. Then, like hubristic Greek kings, we seeded the
byzantine message passing activity with three Evil students, on the
major diagonal, meaning that they were one short of a separator
set. We thought this would be fun challenging, we thought that the
students would learn to pass notes through the one Good student... It
turned out to be way too hard of a task: after the first round they
voted a single Good Student off the island, completing the separator,
and making it impossible for them to accurately figure out who was on
the other side of the Evil Blockade.

On the plus side we were able to instill in them how difficult it is
to detect Evildoers on the internet, and how easy it really is to be
evil.


### Part 4: Denying Service & the Arms Race

In the [final lab](https://ericthewry.github.io/careerex.html)
students played with (D)DoS attacks and mitigations, by giving them
the ability to speed up Evil Routers, inspect the source of packets,
drop incoming packets that have exceeded a certain threshold.

The idea here was to provide a bit of experience with the scientific
method in computer science. First you come up with an attack model
(DoS), then you defend against it (Queue Utilization Thresholds), then
you measure the emergent properties of the defense (sometimes valid
communications get dropped), so you update your model (Sender-Specific
Thresholds), and look for more emergent properties. Then you try and
see if your defense is robust to a more general attack model
(e.g. DDoS/Spoofing), and come up with more sophisticated defense
mechanisms, (e.g. Signing).

This lab period was about 2 hours, and every student was able to
complete the DoS Attack and simple DoS mitigation. A few students were
able to complete the DDoS and Spoofing portions. 


## Takeaways for Networking and Computer Science Education

After having no experience with programming, networking, or with
Mafia, our students were able to:

+ Implement realistic networking programs with little-to-no prior programming experience
+ Derive real-world consensus and discovery protocols by following their noses

From an education perspective, this really speaks to the power of
experiential learning. Without the hands-on experience and visual
interface, I hypothesize that our experience would not have been so effective.

From a Networking perspective, I think this really speaks to the need
for better networking abstractions. Our 14-18 year olds (with no
programming or CS experience) were able to synthesize and implement
these simple, but realistic, policies in three days based on a few
very high level primitives. I believe that this provides some weak
evidence that operating complex networks doesn't need to be as
complicated as it currently is -- we just need effective methods for
abstracting away the details, interpreting what networks are doing,
and predicting how they will behave.

