---
author: Eric Hayden Campbell
date: Jan 26, 2023
title: Cannibalize your TTL
subtitle: A SIGBOVIK paper I didn't write
---

These days, its rare to watch a network verification talk that _doesn't_ start
with a cliche smattering of headlines describing "Facebook's Latest Network
Outage", or "This One Crazy BGP Bug brought down Iran's National Network". This
device is extremely powerful! It's effective at convincing skeptics that Network
Reliability(TM) is not already solved, It doesn convince people that _formal
methods_ are the right solution for network reliability.

__Network Verification evangelists aren't thinking big enough__

Rather than focus on service level objectives like network reliability and
availability, network engineers need to focus on the broad engineering goal of
reducing packet size. The plain fact of the matter is that verification renders
whole portions of the the IEEE standard obsolete and network operators should
feel empowered to resuse those fields for other purposes!

## Étude pour l'anachronisme: Time to Live

For example, in the IEEE standards, the IPv4 header maintains a so-called _Time
To Live_ (TTL) field that keeps track of how long the packet will stay in the
network before it is unceremoniously thrown to the killing floor. Historically
this field literally denoted wall-clock time, but in modern networks it is
really a "number of hops" that gets decremented at each switch. This is
reflected in the IEEE's renaming of the field to _Hop Count_ for IPv6. I'll use
"TTL" as a generic term for both _Time To Live_ and _Hop Count_.

Perhaps the most important goal of the TTL field is to eliminate semantic
forwarding loops. A semantic forwarding loop occurs when the exact same packet,
with all the same header field values, arrives at the same switch (with no
network configuration changes). If this occurs the packet will be forwarded
identically, which will result in it being looped around to the same switch
again.. and again.. and again. The TTL field prevents semantic forwarding loops
by ensuring that the TTL field is always decremented. That way the same packet
never traverses the same switch twice.

However, forwarding loops can be equally achieved via network verification. A
plethora of tools (NetKAT, BagPIPE) can statically verify that your network is
_loop free_. That is, no packet ever traverses the same switch twice. These
tools use heavyweight (but efficient!) formal methods to guarantee(!!!) that
none of the bad behaviors above can ever occur, which means that we don't need
to use or maintain the TTL field in our networks!

In fact, these formal tools do _even better_ than the TTL field can ever hope
to. Not only can they prevent semantic forwarding loops, they can also prevent
_topological forwarding loops_, which are defined to be when the same packet
reaches the same switch regardless of whether any field has changed. The TTL
simply mitigates the effect of these loops by ensuring that the packet will not
traverse such a loop forever. This certainly will not prevent the packet from
becoming a so-called "Chernobyl packet". A _Chernobyl packet_ is one that
triggers such an overaccumulation of broadcast and multicast traffic that
switches and/or links begin to fail. Its perfectly feasible for such a traffic
burst to occur before the TTL can be reduced to 0.

Formal verification tools, however, can prevent topological forwarding loops
from _ever happening_. Even in situations where some topological loops are
_desired behavior_, formal verification tools can permit the desired loops and
prevent the undesired ones. We'll call such a tool a "fine-grained topological
loop detector". This leads me to my first approximate thesis.

__The TTL field is obsolete Verified Networking__

Specifically, I mean that the goals achieved by a the TTL field are fully
subsumed by a fine-grained topological detector.

## An early counterexample: `traceroute`

But of course I'm wrong. The `traceroute` tool is an essential debugging tool in
the network engineers tool kit. `tracerout` well _traces_ the _route_ between
one host and another. The way that it works is via the TTL field. It sends a
collection of packets to the desired destination host with increasing TTLs.
Then, when the TTL of each packet reaches 0, the current switch send an _ICMP
Time Exceeded_ error message back to the original host. `traceroute` then can
reconstruct the traversed packets from these error messages.

So clearly we need the TTL field for this essential task. But is it really that
necessary? The clearest use case for `traceroute` is when you don't have good
visibility into what the network is doing and how its forwarding your packets,
for instance in a BGP network.

However, this use disappears in a software defined network, where the forwarding
rules are computed in a logically centralized way, and can be easily logged and
snooped on. The increasing popularity of dataplane programming languages like P4
and denotational semantics (Petr4) let you statically compute and verify routes
(_simulation fidelity not verified by the FDA_), rendering the dynamic
exploration of `tracroute` obsolete in a deeply programmable SDN.

Now we can update our thesis with a few caveats

__The TTL field is obsolete in Verified, Deeply-Programmable, Software-Defined
Networking (VDPSDN)_

(*whew, good thing its still in the IEEE standard*)

So how can we use this obsolescence?

## On Cannibals: Use TTL for Great Good!

Since TTLs are useless for forwarding loop prevention. Lets use them to minimize
our packets sizes!

Let's consider a verified, deeply programmable, software-defined, campus network
(VDPSDCN). We want to partition network traffic into three separate classes,
_Students_, _Staff_ and _Visitors_, each with ordered privilege sets. _Students_
have at least the privileges of _Visitors_ can and _Staff_ has at least the
privileges of Students.

To implement these traffic classes, we might use the VLAN header, which is a
special header that lives between then Ethernet and IP Headers. We can simply
assign different values to the 12 bit VLAN id value for each traffic class and
implement our security policy by distinguishing these tags.

This is such a waste of 12 bits in a VDPSDCN! Instead, lets cannibalize the
8-bit TTL field to encode these traffic classes! This way we can save 12 bits of
the 1500 bits allowed in a standard packet. This is is 0.8% savings! Wow!

This case study shows conclusively that verifying your DPSDCN will result in
_massively_ more performant networking.

## Conclusion

TTLs are a great example of how verification and deep programmability can
realize operational gains in VDPSDNs. Network verification evangelists should
turn away from motivating their work with frivolous service level objectives
like "uptime" or "availability", and instead motivate their work  on 


> NB: This is satire. The "creativity" of these "logical" steps should only be
> taken in a lighthearted manner. Formal specifications are extremely hard to
> get right and TTLs are very important as an additional line of defense when
> they fail.






