---
title: "Dependently-Typed Data Plane Programming"
authors: Matthias Eichholz, <b>Eric Hayden Campbell</b>, Matthias Krebs, Nate Foster,  Mira Mezini
venue: POPL
month: January 2022 
pdf: "pdfs/pi4.pdf"
video: "images/pi4-popl.mp4"
code: "https://github.com/stg-tud/pi4"
descr: "Develop a dependent refinement type system for P4 with a liquid-style Z3 backend to prohibit undefined behavior"
--- 

The P4 programming language enables modeling the behavior of the network data
plane in software. With increasingly powerful and complex applications running
in the network, the risk of errors also increases, especially since P4's main
abstraction for representing packet data lacks basic safety guarantees. This
reinforces the need for methods and tools to statically verify the correctness
of data plane programs. Existing data plane verification tools employ
closed-world monolithic reasoning. 

However, dataplane progamming languages have begun to specify rich
packet-processing functionality by composing simple functions defined in
reusable libraries (cf MicroP4, daPIPE). Verifying such composable functionality
requires compositional reasoning tools. 

Type systems are a lightweight compositional verification technique that
features modular reasoning. However, there is a significant gap between
guarantees provided by verification tools like p4v and those provided by type
checkers based on traditional typing disciplines like SafeP4, which cannot
reason about runtime values. In this paper, we close this gap by presenting Π4,
a dependently-typed core of P4 based on regular types with decidable
refinements. We prove soundness for Π4's type system and present case studies
illustrating Π4's ability to check realistic program properties.
