---
title: "MatchBox: A Semantic Foundation for Data Plane Portability"
authors: <b>Eric Hayden Campbell</b>, Robert Zhang, Divyanshu Saxena, Aditya Akella, Isil Dillig
month: June 2026, Conditionally Accepted
venue: PLDI
descr: MatchBox is a statcically-typed declarative language and compiler for translating match-action tables.
---

Match-action tables form the core abstraction for programming network packet-processing systems, from
fixed-function switches to eBPF-based software dataplanes. However, their concrete syntax and semantics vary
widely across targets, reflecting differences in hardware generations, engineering practices, and vendor design
choices. As a result, portability of these programs across different environments becomes a persistent chal-
lenge. This paper presents MatchBox, a system for translating match-action programs across heterogeneous
environments. At its core is the Match Algebra, a compositional formalism for expressing transformations
on match-action tables in a concise and declarative manner. To ensure unambiguous semantics, MatchBox
introduces a static type system based on guarded functional dependencies (GFDs) that guarantee that every
well-typed Match Algebra expression denotes a mathematical function. Given such an expression, the Match-
Box compiler automatically realizes it as a set of match-action tables for the target environment, efficiently
producing compact match-action tables that are semantically faithful to the specification. To demonstrate the
usefulness and practicality of MatchBox, we evaluate it on realistic portability challenges across the network
stack and show that it enables concise, declarative specifications that can be effectively realized into compact
match-action tables.